docs/explanation/process-mining.md, before:

# YAWL Process Mining Enhancement Plan

## Current State Analysis

YAWL v6.0 already has a comprehensive process mining infrastructure but requires enhancements to fully realize the mission. Here's the current state:

### Existing Infrastructure

1. **Event Logging Infrastructure**
   - `YXESBuilder` - Converts YAWL events to XES format
   - `YLogEventListener` - Interface for handling log events
   - `YCaseEvent` - Case-level event representation
   - Event streaming through `YCaseMonitoringService`

2. **Process Mining Core**
   - `EventLogExporter` - Exports XES logs via InterfaceE
   - `ConformanceAnalyzer` - Basic conformance checking (fitness/precision)
   - `ComplianceRuleEngine` - Rule-based compliance checking
   - `Rust4PmClient` - HTTP client for Rust4PM backend
   - `ProcessMiningServiceClient` - Generic HTTP client for process mining services

3. **Process Synthesis**
   - `YawlSpecSynthesizer` - Converts PNML to YAWL specification
   - `PnmlParser` - Parses PNML Petri net formats
   - `ProcessVariantAnalyzer` - Analyzes workflow variants

4. **Integration Points**
   - MCP tools for process mining (partially implemented)
   - A2A skill integration
   - Observability integration

### Gaps Identified

1. **Real-time Event Streaming** - Current export is batch-based
2. **Advanced Process Discovery** - Limited to basic algorithms
3. **Performance Analysis** - Lacks bottleneck detection and cycle time analysis
4. **XES/OCEL2 Compatibility** - Needs full IEEE 2850-2022 compliance
5. **MCP Tool Implementation** - Incomplete due to compilation errors

## Enhancement Roadmap

### Phase 1: Enhanced Event Log Extraction (Priority: High)

#### 1.1 Real-time Event Streaming
Create a streaming event log exporter that captures events in real-time:

```java
public interface YAWLEventStream {
    void startStreaming(YSpecificationID specId, EventStreamListener listener);
    void stopStreaming();
    void pauseStreaming();
    void resumeStreaming();
}

public interface EventStreamListener {
    void onEvent(YWorkItemEvent event);
    void onTraceComplete(String caseId, List<YWorkItemEvent> trace);
    void onError(Exception e);
}
```

#### 1.2 XES/OCEL2 Compliance Enhancement
- Enhance `YXESBuilder` for full IEEE 2850-2022 compliance
- Add OCEL2 export capability for object-centric mining
- Include resource information, case data, and lifecycle events

```java
public class Ocel2Exporter {
    public String exportToOcel2(List<YWorkItem> workItems, YSpecification specification);
    public String exportCasesToOcel2(Set<String> caseIds);
    public String exportResourcesToOcel2();
}
```

### Phase 2: Advanced Process Discovery (Priority: High)

#### 2.1 Process Discovery Algorithms
Implement major process discovery algorithms:

```java
public interface ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    ProcessDiscoveryResult discover(ProcessMiningContext context);
    String getAlgorithmName();
    AlgorithmType getType();
}

public enum AlgorithmType {
    ALPHA, HEURISTIC, INDUCTIVE, DFGBASED, ILP
}

public class AlphaMiner implements ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    // Alpha++ algorithm implementation
}

public class HeuristicMiner implements ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    // Heuristic miner with noise handling
}

public class InductiveMiner implements ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    // Inductive miner for process trees
}
```

#### 2.2 Hybrid Discovery Engine
Create a discovery engine that combines multiple algorithms:

```java
public class ProcessDiscoveryEngine {
    private final List<ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm> algorithms;

    public ProcessDiscoveryResult discoverBest(ProcessMiningContext context);
    public ProcessDiscoveryResult discoverWithConfidence(ProcessMiningContext context);
    public ProcessDiscoveryResult compareAlgorithms(ProcessMiningContext context);
}
```

### Phase 3: Enhanced Conformance Checking (Priority: High)

#### 3.1 Advanced Conformance Analysis
Enhance conformance checking with multiple techniques:

```java
public interface ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    ConformanceResult check(ProcessModel model, EventLog log);
    String getTechniqueName();
}

public class TokenReplayTechnique implements ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    // Token-based replay with fitness/precision
}

public class AlignmentsTechnique implements ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    // Alignments-based conformance checking
}

public class FootprintTechnique implements ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    // Footprint-based conformance
}
```

#### 3.2 Deviation Detection
Implement real-time deviation detection:

```java
public interface DeviationDetector {
    void setProcessModel(ProcessModel model);
    DeviationReport detectDeviations(EventLog log);
    void onEvent(YWorkItemEvent event);
}

public class DeviationReport {
    private List<Deviation> deviations;
    private Severity severity;
    private Recommendation[] recommendations;
}
```

### Phase 4: Performance Analysis (Priority: High)

#### 4.1 Performance Metrics Collection
Comprehensive performance metrics:

```java
public class PerformanceAnalyzer {
    public PerformanceMetrics analyzeCasePerformance(List<YWorkItem> workItems);
    public PerformanceMetrics analyzeResourcePerformance();
    public PerformanceMetrics analyzeBottlenecks();

    public enum MetricType {
        FLOW_TIME, WAITING_TIME, CYCLE_TIME, THROUGHPUT, RESOURCE_UTILIZATION
    }
}

public class PerformanceMetrics {
    private Map<MetricType, Double> metrics;
    private Map<String, Double> activityMetrics;
    private Map<String, Double> resourceMetrics;
    private List<Bottleneck> bottlenecks;
}
```

#### 4.2 Bottleneck Detection
Advanced bottleneck detection algorithms:

```java
public interface BottleneckDetector {
    List<Bottleneck> detectBottlenecks(EventLog log);
    void setThresholds(Map<String, Double> thresholds);
}

public class Bottleneck {
    private String activityId;
    private double severity;
    private String type; // QUEUE, THROUGHPUT, RESOURCE
    private Location location;
    private Recommendation fix;
}
```

### Phase 5: Integration Enhancements (Priority: Medium)

#### 5.1 MCP Tools Implementation
Complete MCP tool implementation for autonomous agents:

```java
public class ProcessMiningMcpTools {
    public DiscoveryResult discoverProcess(DiscoveryRequest request);
    public ConformanceResult checkConformance(ConformanceRequest request);
    public PerformanceResult analyzePerformance(PerformanceRequest request);
    public EventLog exportEventLog(ExportRequest request);
}
```

#### 5.2 Observability Integration
Integrate with OpenTelemetry for monitoring:

```java
public class ProcessMiningTelemetry {
    public void trackProcessDiscovery(DiscoveryResult result);
    public void trackConformanceViolation(Deviation deviation);
    public void trackBottleneckDetection(Bottleneck bottleneck);
}
```

### Phase 6: Testing and Validation (Priority: Medium)

#### 6.1 Comprehensive Test Suite
Unit tests, integration tests, and performance tests:

```java
class ProcessMiningIntegrationTest {
    @Test
    void testRealTimeExport() {}
    @Test
    void testConformanceChecking() {}
    @Test
    void testProcessDiscovery() {}
    @Test
    void testPerformanceAnalysis() {}
}

class ProcessMiningPerformanceTest {
    @Test
    void testLargeLogProcessing() {}
    @Test
    void testStreamingPerformance() {}
    @Test
    void testMemoryUsage() {}
}
```

## Implementation Strategy

### 1. Incremental Development
- Fix compilation issues first (MCP/A2A dependencies)
- Implement each phase incrementally
- Maintain backward compatibility

### 2. Test-Driven Development
- Write tests before implementation
- Ensure 80%+ coverage
- Include integration tests with real YAWL workflows

### 3. Performance Considerations
- Use virtual threads for I/O operations
- Implement caching for frequently accessed data
- Optimize for large logs (1M+ events)

### 4. Documentation
- Javadoc for all public APIs
- Usage examples for each component
- Integration guide for YAWL administrators

## Expected Outcomes

1. **Enhanced Event Log Extraction**
   - Real-time streaming capability
   - Full XES/OCEL2 compliance
   - Performance-optimized for large logs

2. **Advanced Process Discovery**
   - Multiple discovery algorithms
   - Hybrid discovery capabilities
   - Automatic model selection

3. **Enhanced Conformance Checking**
   - Multiple conformance techniques
   - Real-time deviation detection
   - Actionable recommendations

4. **Performance Analysis**
   - Comprehensive performance metrics
   - Automatic bottleneck detection
   - Resource utilization analysis

5. **Integration Capabilities**
   - Complete MCP tool implementation
   - Observability integration
   - Autonomous agent support

## Timeline

- **Phase 1**: 2-3 weeks
- **Phase 2**: 3-4 weeks
- **Phase 3**: 2-3 weeks
- **Phase 4**: 2-3 weeks
- **Phase 5**: 1-2 weeks
- **Phase 6**: 2-3 weeks

**Total**: ~12-16 weeks for full implementation

## Dependencies

- Java 25+ (already in use)
- Jackson for JSON processing (already included)
- JDOM for XML processing (already included)
- Optional: PM4Py integration for advanced algorithms

## Risk Mitigation

1. **Compilation Issues**: Focus on core process mining first, then add MCP/A2A
2. **Performance**: Profile and optimize early, especially for large logs
3. **Compatibility**: Maintain backward compatibility with existing event logs
4. **Testing**: Comprehensive test suite to catch regressions early

## Next Steps

1. Fix compilation issues in MCP/A2A modules
2. Implement real-time event streaming
3. Add XES/OCEL2 compliance
4. Begin process discovery algorithms
5. Enhance conformance checking
6. Add performance analysis capabilities

Commit message:

docs: add OCPM and Process Intelligence documentation
Adds four new documents grounded in van der Aalst's "No AI Without PI!" paper
and YAWL's existing Rust4PM + pm4py integration stack:

- docs/explanation/object-centric-process-mining.md — OCPM theory, OCED, OCEL 2.0
  formats (JSON/XML/SQLite), and YAWL's zero-adapter native fit (YWorkItem already
  links case, task, specification, resource — the four canonical OCEL 2.0 objects)

- docs/explanation/process-intelligence.md — PI = OCPM + AI, three AI types
  (generative/predictive/prescriptive) mapped to YAWL's live stack
  (ProcessMiningFacade, GregverseSimulator, pm4py bridge, MCP tools), full PI
  stack diagram

- docs/how-to/integration/ocpm-integration.md — step-by-step guide to deploy
  Rust4PM server, start pm4py bridge (MCP/A2A), wire MCP tools to unblock
  PM_UNAVAILABLE, export OCEL 2.0 from YAWL, analyse with pm4py, use rustxes
  for 10-40x faster large-log import, and direct Rust usage

- docs/reference/mcp-process-mining-tools.md — complete reference for all 5
  MCP process mining tools (yawl_pm_export_xes, yawl_pm_analyze,
  yawl_pm_performance, yawl_pm_variants, yawl_pm_social_network) with
  parameters, return values, and examples

Updates docs/INDEX.md and docs/explanation/process-mining.md with cross-links
to the new documents.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01UbPbZRwoX3xPGFzVBRKDtR

docs/explanation/process-mining.md, after:

# YAWL Process Mining Enhancement Plan

> **Conceptual foundation**: Before reading this roadmap, see
> [Object-Centric Process Mining](object-centric-process-mining.md) for OCPM/OCEL 2.0
> theory and [Process Intelligence](process-intelligence.md) for how YAWL's PI stack
> connects OCPM to generative, predictive, and prescriptive AI.
> To deploy the existing Rust4PM + pm4py integration, see
> [OCPM Integration How-To](../how-to/integration/ocpm-integration.md).

## Current State Analysis

YAWL v6.0 already has a comprehensive process mining infrastructure but requires enhancements to fully realize the mission. Here's the current state:

### Existing Infrastructure

1. **Event Logging Infrastructure**
   - `YXESBuilder` - Converts YAWL events to XES format
   - `YLogEventListener` - Interface for handling log events
   - `YCaseEvent` - Case-level event representation
   - Event streaming through `YCaseMonitoringService`

2. **Process Mining Core**
   - `EventLogExporter` - Exports XES logs via InterfaceE
   - `ConformanceAnalyzer` - Basic conformance checking (fitness/precision)
   - `ComplianceRuleEngine` - Rule-based compliance checking
   - `Rust4PmClient` - HTTP client for Rust4PM backend
   - `ProcessMiningServiceClient` - Generic HTTP client for process mining services

3. **Process Synthesis**
   - `YawlSpecSynthesizer` - Converts PNML to YAWL specification
   - `PnmlParser` - Parses PNML Petri net formats
   - `ProcessVariantAnalyzer` - Analyzes workflow variants

4. **Integration Points**
   - MCP tools for process mining (partially implemented)
   - A2A skill integration
   - Observability integration

### Gaps Identified

1. **Real-time Event Streaming** - Current export is batch-based
2. **Advanced Process Discovery** - Limited to basic algorithms
3. **Performance Analysis** - Lacks bottleneck detection and cycle time analysis
4. **XES/OCEL2 Compatibility** - Needs full IEEE 2850-2022 compliance
5. **MCP Tool Implementation** - Incomplete due to compilation errors

## Enhancement Roadmap

### Phase 1: Enhanced Event Log Extraction (Priority: High)

#### 1.1 Real-time Event Streaming
Create a streaming event log exporter that captures events in real-time:

```java
public interface YAWLEventStream {
    void startStreaming(YSpecificationID specId, EventStreamListener listener);
    void stopStreaming();
    void pauseStreaming();
    void resumeStreaming();
}

public interface EventStreamListener {
    void onEvent(YWorkItemEvent event);
    void onTraceComplete(String caseId, List<YWorkItemEvent> trace);
    void onError(Exception e);
}
```

#### 1.2 XES/OCEL2 Compliance Enhancement
- Enhance `YXESBuilder` for full IEEE 2850-2022 compliance
- Add OCEL2 export capability for object-centric mining
- Include resource information, case data, and lifecycle events

```java
public class Ocel2Exporter {
    public String exportToOcel2(List<YWorkItem> workItems, YSpecification specification);
    public String exportCasesToOcel2(Set<String> caseIds);
    public String exportResourcesToOcel2();
}
```

### Phase 2: Advanced Process Discovery (Priority: High)

#### 2.1 Process Discovery Algorithms
Implement major process discovery algorithms:

```java
public interface ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    ProcessDiscoveryResult discover(ProcessMiningContext context);
    String getAlgorithmName();
    AlgorithmType getType();
}

public enum AlgorithmType {
    ALPHA, HEURISTIC, INDUCTIVE, DFGBASED, ILP
}

public class AlphaMiner implements ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    // Alpha++ algorithm implementation
}

public class HeuristicMiner implements ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    // Heuristic miner with noise handling
}

public class InductiveMiner implements ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm {
    // Inductive miner for process trees
}
```

#### 2.2 Hybrid Discovery Engine
Create a discovery engine that combines multiple algorithms:

```java
public class ProcessDiscoveryEngine {
    private final List<ProcessDiscoveryAlgorithm> algorithms;

    public ProcessDiscoveryResult discoverBest(ProcessMiningContext context);
    public ProcessDiscoveryResult discoverWithConfidence(ProcessMiningContext context);
    public ProcessDiscoveryResult compareAlgorithms(ProcessMiningContext context);
}
```

### Phase 3: Enhanced Conformance Checking (Priority: High)

#### 3.1 Advanced Conformance Analysis
Enhance conformance checking with multiple techniques:

```java
public interface ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    ConformanceResult check(ProcessModel model, EventLog log);
    String getTechniqueName();
}

public class TokenReplayTechnique implements ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    // Token-based replay with fitness/precision
}

public class AlignmentsTechnique implements ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    // Alignments-based conformance checking
}

public class FootprintTechnique implements ConformanceCheckingTechnique {
    // Footprint-based conformance
}
```

#### 3.2 Deviation Detection
Implement real-time deviation detection:

```java
public interface DeviationDetector {
    void setProcessModel(ProcessModel model);
    DeviationReport detectDeviations(EventLog log);
    void onEvent(YWorkItemEvent event);
}

public class DeviationReport {
    private List<Deviation> deviations;
    private Severity severity;
    private Recommendation[] recommendations;
}
```

### Phase 4: Performance Analysis (Priority: High)

#### 4.1 Performance Metrics Collection
Comprehensive performance metrics:

```java
public class PerformanceAnalyzer {
    public PerformanceMetrics analyzeCasePerformance(List<YWorkItem> workItems);
    public PerformanceMetrics analyzeResourcePerformance();
    public PerformanceMetrics analyzeBottlenecks();

    public enum MetricType {
        FLOW_TIME, WAITING_TIME, CYCLE_TIME, THROUGHPUT, RESOURCE_UTILIZATION
    }
}

public class PerformanceMetrics {
    private Map<MetricType, Double> metrics;
    private Map<String, Double> activityMetrics;
    private Map<String, Double> resourceMetrics;
    private List<Bottleneck> bottlenecks;
}
```

#### 4.2 Bottleneck Detection
Advanced bottleneck detection algorithms:

```java
public interface BottleneckDetector {
    List<Bottleneck> detectBottlenecks(EventLog log);
    void setThresholds(Map<String, Double> thresholds);
}

public class Bottleneck {
    private String activityId;
    private double severity;
    private String type; // QUEUE, THROUGHPUT, RESOURCE
    private Location location;
    private Recommendation fix;
}
```

### Phase 5: Integration Enhancements (Priority: Medium)

#### 5.1 MCP Tools Implementation
Complete MCP tool implementation for autonomous agents:

```java
public class ProcessMiningMcpTools {
    public DiscoveryResult discoverProcess(DiscoveryRequest request);
    public ConformanceResult checkConformance(ConformanceRequest request);
    public PerformanceResult analyzePerformance(PerformanceRequest request);
    public EventLog exportEventLog(ExportRequest request);
}
```

#### 5.2 Observability Integration
Integrate with OpenTelemetry for monitoring:

```java
public class ProcessMiningTelemetry {
    public void trackProcessDiscovery(DiscoveryResult result);
    public void trackConformanceViolation(Deviation deviation);
    public void trackBottleneckDetection(Bottleneck bottleneck);
}
```

### Phase 6: Testing and Validation (Priority: Medium)

#### 6.1 Comprehensive Test Suite
Unit tests, integration tests, and performance tests:

```java
class ProcessMiningIntegrationTest {
    @Test
    void testRealTimeExport() {}
    @Test
    void testConformanceChecking() {}
    @Test
    void testProcessDiscovery() {}
    @Test
    void testPerformanceAnalysis() {}
}

class ProcessMiningPerformanceTest {
    @Test
    void testLargeLogProcessing() {}
    @Test
    void testStreamingPerformance() {}
    @Test
    void testMemoryUsage() {}
}
```

## Implementation Strategy

### 1. Incremental Development
- Fix compilation issues first (MCP/A2A dependencies)
- Implement each phase incrementally
- Maintain backward compatibility

### 2. Test-Driven Development
- Write tests before implementation
- Ensure 80%+ coverage
- Include integration tests with real YAWL workflows

### 3. Performance Considerations
- Use virtual threads for I/O operations
- Implement caching for frequently accessed data
- Optimize for large logs (1M+ events)

### 4. Documentation
- Javadoc for all public APIs
- Usage examples for each component
- Integration guide for YAWL administrators

## Expected Outcomes

1. **Enhanced Event Log Extraction**
   - Real-time streaming capability
   - Full XES/OCEL2 compliance
   - Performance-optimized for large logs

2. **Advanced Process Discovery**
   - Multiple discovery algorithms
   - Hybrid discovery capabilities
   - Automatic model selection

3. **Enhanced Conformance Checking**
   - Multiple conformance techniques
   - Real-time deviation detection
   - Actionable recommendations

4. **Performance Analysis**
   - Comprehensive performance metrics
   - Automatic bottleneck detection
   - Resource utilization analysis

5. **Integration Capabilities**
   - Complete MCP tool implementation
   - Observability integration
   - Autonomous agent support

## Timeline

- **Phase 1**: 2-3 weeks
- **Phase 2**: 3-4 weeks
- **Phase 3**: 2-3 weeks
- **Phase 4**: 2-3 weeks
- **Phase 5**: 1-2 weeks
- **Phase 6**: 2-3 weeks

**Total**: ~12-16 weeks for full implementation

## Dependencies

- Java 25+ (already in use)
- Jackson for JSON processing (already included)
- JDOM for XML processing (already included)
- Optional: PM4Py integration for advanced algorithms

## Risk Mitigation

1. **Compilation Issues**: Focus on core process mining first, then add MCP/A2A
2. **Performance**: Profile and optimize early, especially for large logs
3. **Compatibility**: Maintain backward compatibility with existing event logs
4. **Testing**: Comprehensive test suite to catch regressions early

## Next Steps

1. Fix compilation issues in MCP/A2A modules
2. Implement real-time event streaming
3. Add XES/OCEL2 compliance
4. Begin process discovery algorithms
5. Enhance conformance checking
6. Add performance analysis capabilities
